[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
Hey there, OddLotss listeners. You are
about to hear a very special episode of
the podcast. This was recorded live at
our June 26th event in New York. We are
talking with Charlie McGeligette. He is
of course managing director and
crossasset macro strategist for the
global markets America's business over
at Numora. We talked to him about
volatility in the market. What else?
Yep. It's been a kind of extraordinary
couple of months with stocks basically
at all-time highs despite so much going
on in the world. What actually explains
what's happening? Charlie uh does a
pretty good job. So, take a listen.
Thank you so much, Charlie, for being
here. Awesome to be here. Awesome to see
you guys. So, I didn't actually see
where the market closed today, but like
we're pretty close. Like either we're at
record highs or we're very close to it.
I didn't actually see. But it's crazy to
me all that's happened in 2025
and like we're sitting here at alltime
highs. It's not intuitive. You have to
admit it's kind of weird. the um you
know I think the message I'm trying to
remember the last time I was with you
guys but probably the message I was
communicating at that time was the the
fixation and kind of the dooming
with the left tail scenarios and um as
so often is the case when people are not
incentivized to see the world burn which
might be debatable to some um but and
you start seeing especially with regard
to you know negotiating tactics and
things like that where you start getting
that not quite as bad as feared
scenario. oftent times there's an impact
certainly with the mechanical stuff that
we so often talk about and you really
underpric the less bad outcome and
there's a mechanical impact there's a
lot of you know v distribution stuff and
it creates second order impact second
order flows I think the most fascinating
two points that I would say outside of
the you know the the mechanical flows
that we talk about and and the
volatility component of this is is is
two things I I think back to 2022
um where we had our first kind of
inflationdriven macrobear case, right?
We just started the tightening cycle. I
think there was nine or 10 months in a
row of inflation upside surprises with
CPI and um you know the macro bear case
for equities at that point was this
earnings recession where due to this
price shock it was going to impact
consumption topline sales go lower and
you know so so on and so forth. What
ended up happening is ironically because
of the health of the consumer and tight
tight tight employment with wages at
40-year highs, you ended up actually
getting a dynamic where the corporate
world operates on aggregate consumption.
They they operate in a nominal GDP world
and that inflation perversely for the
bears was the earnings catalyst and all
those folks got stopped out in 2023.
there is an element of that still to
this day right now as it relates to
earnings. Um even be even though like
nominal GDP is is in a different place
to a certain extent still kind of 5%ish.
Um but the other point too is that as it
relates to the capex spending
uncertainty story, right? If you know
corporates don't know what they're
supposed to do with their cash because
of the you know the the kind of range of
outcomes with regards to you know where
they where these you know uh tariffs are
going to end up um the sand in the gears
of the global economy. Well, the thought
was of course, you know, if corporates
don't know what to be spending on and um
consumers are feeling that impact as
well, you're going to get this eventual
drag with regards to consumption. You're
going to have corporates in a bad place.
You either lose the topline sales
because consumers are paying through the
roof or you have to absorb those costs
and your margins go lower. Um but what
corporates have instead done have taken
authorized buybacks to all-time highs.
So we're not spending on, you know, R&D.
We're not spending on hiring or building
that new plant. We're going to buy back
more stock than ever before year to
date. And that, you know, if you look at
corporate buyback flows as a source of
demand for equities over the past 1015
year period, it's a magnitudes six,
seven, eight times magnitudes largest
source of demand. So you've had these
two kind of unintuitive dynamics in the
market that have actually kept us higher
on top of all those kind of V scaling
things that we like to talk about. Wait.
So the other thing that's happened is
people are back to actually selling V.
So basically betting that you know
things will stay relatively calm. Why is
that happening? It seems like a weird
time to bet against volatility. Yeah. I
I think I think selling V uh has become
a new form of fixed income in a world
where bonds are no longer a risk-free
asset. Now that you know can go wrong so
many ways. In this case the
proliferation of like premium income
overwriting strategies within the ETF
world, exotic structured products um and
kind of you know more uh I would say you
know complicated you know V selling
strategies like uh dispersion things
like that. The number of V suppliers out
there very shortdated. It gets dealers
stuffed on gamma, I always like to say.
And in that sense, you know,
particularly with the amount of
shortdated volatility selling, um, you
know, when dealers are stuffed on gamma,
it compresses the distribution of
outcomes, right? If the market's moving
higher, you're selling into that
market's moving lower, you're shock
absorbing. Um, the thing that I would
say back to that point about, you know,
selling volatility as some sort of kind
of fixed income product. back in 2022
with that tightening cycle and all the
the the bare dooming um with regards to
you know we're going to break something
um you know such a such a powerful you
know ultimately over 500 basis points of
t of hikes. Um the the trick was that
okay you the Fed is telling you to be
short assets. Mhm. You need to be able
to sleep at night. Cash was an asset
again. So, you know, market was down 30
some percent. Bonds were down
simultaneously.
Still off that much. Yeah. S&P and
NASDAQ was you know, you know, even
bigger than that obviously because
remember it was like this tech ccentric
growth kind of unwind. Um but what ended
up happening was that you know the Fed
was trying to create a negative wealth
effect. We've talked about that before
because they couldn't impact supply side
disruption. They could only impact
demand side. And by telling you to be in
cash, you could sleep at night. Well,
guess what? the next year you missed a
50% rally in the NASDAQ. So what really
smart marketers have done is say well
I'm going to give you price appreciation
of equities just capped and off the back
of that too we're going to sell out of
the money calls against this and you get
this like little premium income thing
and it's you know they're never telling
you you're shorting options. The good
news is with a lot of these products
nowadays, like you're not shorting
crash. You're not shorting downside. But
um also too, sometimes they're they're
contributing to their own demise in this
kind of grinding market where you're
stopping into the calls that you've been
selling. There's so much going on. I
totally forgot that we had such a big
sell-off in 2022. I totally forgot that
there was like a 50% like all of these
things like oh that actually happened.
Um zooming out big picture like it seems
objectively true. you've been trading a
long time. Like there are so many
headlines these days and they're always
changing and there's just so much to
talk about. What is the trading like and
how do you know does it feel different
these days when there's just we're just
facing this constant wall of news? Is
there something that changes in the sort
of complexion of how people trade? Well,
there's there's certainly different like
risk appetite regimes, risk sentiment
regimes, you know, where um you know,
there was a period of time I remember in
those early discussions on like zero DT
options where generally speaking at that
time coming off the back of like you
know, meme coins and and that whole like
yolo phenomenon, you know, the
speculative excess peak of that kind of
2021, you know, sty driven madness, that
was a very different world where people
were kind of like, you buying, you know,
optionality, creating gamma squeezes,
the redder boards, Wall Street bats, all
that jazz. Now that you're kind of
settling into this world, we've been
conditioned, we've been conditioned for
15 years of moral hazard, right? Central
bankers intervening, obviously
politicians now intervening, and this is
like, you know, party agnostic with
regards to the fiscal stimulus where it
has become conditioned into traders both
retail and institutional. You know, this
dynamic where you have to this is the
expected behavior. you have to buy that
dip and sell it, right? So, you're
constantly trying to like kind of
triangulate and kind of sanity check
yourself with regards to this
reflexivity. And you know, like August
5th, August 2nd, August 5th last year
were really interesting experiment cuz
August 2nd, we finally got that first
glimpse at what our market will
eventually do. This time again, huge VAR
event in, you know, within the fixed
income space certainly. Um, and then it
trickled down into all asset classes
from there. It was the first time that
labor, it looked like labor was
cracking. Um, and we had that, you know,
four zcore miss and the U rate and two
and a half zcore miss and and the
non-farm payroll print and that was
after a week of already soft labor data.
And that was the holy moment once the
consumer goes this whole, you know,
economic miracle goes. And what that
then created was this um, you know, was
this massive dynamic where at the end of
that day, everybody said, "Okay, risk is
dicey right now. There's going to be a
lot of the leveraging off the back of
this realized volatility shock. I want
to go home and short Delta, like short
the market, but I want to be short V
because V squeezed. V exploded that day.
That was both clients and options
dealers. The problem was because of all
these second order impacts and
deleveraging impacts and um was that
Nikke on Sunday night opened down 12%.
So that short V position was going to be
so smart because we always reflexively
sell that, you know, and you've got to
monetize your hedges in like two hours
before people start leaning in. All that
V supply, the back test says the higher
V goes, the more I have to sell. And
that's that sell the rip by the by the
dip. Well, those people got their arms
blown off, you know, by 8 in the
morning. And that was the famous like
VIX index, right, which is a a
theoretical calculation based on like
fake bidden offers from dealers
basically. Um, you know, printed 63 or
whatever it was. Um, not an actual
ticking price, but then the VIX future
was traded at 38, which is like
realistic. But, you know, those are
those scenarios where that conditioning
is how things go really wrong because
you think you got it figured out and you
don't. The most recent example of course
has been you know this this Trump collar
dynamic where the market finally figured
out what was the human vivix as I call
him you know who who you know the
volatility the only one who calls it
you're the only one I need it on my
coffee mug you know I have these like
Nura coffee mugs with some of my
favorite sayings like human vivix would
have been a good one to trademark we'll
trade you an oddls mug for a human vivix
no more mug that's done that is done but
like you know he has he views himself as
having a mandate to disrupt the status
quo of 80 years of pox americana like
and that's clearly like the the approach
here right so the prior distribution of
outcomes is now out here the the quick
learning from the market however after
these initial series of wall shocks was
that okay we found a pain point you know
market sold off to such an extent the
interest rate volatility particularly in
the long end not just stocks all right
you know we've activated the Trump put
however upon those compromises the
market rallies back it increases his you
know willingness to then lean back in
from a negotiating ploy. So he's
basically selling the call to fund the
put. And when you have that collaring
effect, you get the opposite dynamic,
right? You get this realize of all
compression, which is frankly a large
part of what the past 2 months has been.
So, you're constantly reassessing
how everybody thinks you're going to
think, which is like you're anticipating
the anticipators.
[Music]
So Joe asked you for basically color on
the complexion of the market nowadays
and I know you just got back from
weren't you on some sort of crazy epic
travel schedule where you flew around
the world. Yes. What are you hearing
from clients like what kind of questions
are they asking you? People are so
consensually macrobear
you know on that stagflationary outcome.
Um, you know, and I think like that's
that's one of the tricks like it's, you
know, at first it was like, okay, you
know, let's let's expect, you know,
these early return like mind you, you
know, Smoot Holly tariff highs like
90-year tariff highs, right? We, you
know, prior to the the, you know, Trump
2.0, the effective rate was 2.4%. We're
17.3% right now as it stands, right? So,
like, you know, how does that not bleed
through to this, you know, eventual
price shock or margin compression, all
this stuff that hits, you know,
consumption? Um, and you know, initially
it was okay midsummer. I think part of
what's happening right now is that, you
know, from a corporate perspective as it
relates to the consumer is that taco has
changed their behavior too. Like why,
you know, I'm not going to blow up my
topline sales and, you know, rush to,
you know, price shock my clients at a
time, you know. So I think there's been
a lot of holding off too as far as or
willingness to even absorb a little bit
of that the the price you know increases
that are coming through. Um and you know
so it's been getting increasingly
uncomfortable. All these left tail most
acute outcomes have have certainly been
mitigated away and compromised away and
kind of handed away. The market starts
rallying in your face. You're expecting
this very bearish outcome. It's starting
to hurt. You've underpriced the right
tail. get a fiscal deal seemingly close
to being done even just today, right?
Late in the day, section 8.99, which is
this kind of like, you know, completely
Tracy wrote a bunch about it. Now, it's
all the revenge tax, right? Is there
anything worse than like getting a bunch
of work done and then having to trash
it? All I'll say is it's good for
content. Yes. There we go. Yes, it is.
You talk a lot a lot about hypotheticals
over the past couple months. For sure.
Yeah. you know, you're you're well
educated with your scenarios, but like
in this case, you know, that was
another, you know, this revenge tax
escalation. Well, all of a sudden now,
you know, cooler heads prevail that
increases the likelihood that the
digital tax, you know, stuff with Europe
that was an impediment for deals goes,
you know, right way. So, you've just had
like left tails turn right tails and
nobody has the exposure on. There's just
so much chronic macro bleed. Now,
perversely, you're seeing it with
stocks. People are getting stopped in.
You're buying the highs. you're having
to take up your exposure, having to take
up your nets after fighting it, kicking
and screaming and grossly under
capturing the rally. This is when it
sets the table for crash. And that's why
as you're forced to get longer, you have
to start hedge. You have to start
hedging. Do you think right now I mean I
remember um well like right now today
would you say there's still a lot
there's a lot of discretionary money
where people feel like they're underway
at the market where they feel like
they're still fighting this dynamic
chasing and they're still feel like oh
man every day the stock market goes up I
don't have the exposure I wish I had
right now those are the classic buyers
are higher yeah you know and there
that's still out there but they haven't
the they haven't fully capitulated yet
but It's, you know, what you're seeing
with the market grinding higher every
day. And by the way, through the
straddle, like this is the interesting
thing I always say like we can't crash
until skew is steep. Skew is a relative
measure of kind of downside demand
versus upside demand. You know, put
skew, you know, demand for out of the
money downside versus out of the money
downside. Both of those me metrics in
the past week have hit 100 percentile
over the past year. The past year has a
lot of going on, right? So, you know,
people are hedged because they are back
getting long where things get spicy. And
when you're hedged, that means dealers
are, you know, short downside. They're
going to be short gamma, short Vega into
a sell-off. That's accelerant flow. Um,
that feeds into the prevailing market
momentum. The lower that we go, the
more, you know, spot equities you have
to sell. The higher the V goes, the more
volume you have to buy. Bad scenario.
It's an accelerant flow in this case. Um
the trick now that's starting to happen
and this is why I feel like we're
probably getting closer to you know a
crescendo um is that now you're getting
spot the market up vault up and volivall
going up and what that's telling me is
that okay people are actually now being
forced to chase into upside right and
right now part that's our chart for the
newsletter tomorrow stocks and vol spot
up vol and and what that means is that
people are being forced to grab into the
upside side and that's also feeding this
short gamma move to the upside because
dealers are short calls now and this you
know as we hit 6150 6200 things like
that. Um, ultimately I always like to
say when you get spot up volop in and of
itself, it it, you know, creates kind of
like a meltup like some sort of kind of,
you know, squeezy rally on the way up
that collapses under the weight of its
own delta. Like collapses under the
weight of the mechanical buying on the
way up, the mechanical dealer hedging on
the way up because you need to keep
fulfilling that need and demand. People
are getting longer. You know, you're
finally seeing that dynamic. People are
getting longer. that creates the the
potential derisking flow on the way
down, especially once you're talking
about systematic V scaling strategies
that as V goes higher, they have to just
sell, you know, unemotionally. But what
would be a reasonable catalyst for that
to happen? Well, I think the the
near-term one has been, you know, the
the fact that, you know, July 8th, the
original kind of reciprocal delay that,
you know, and you saw a bunch of
headlines today saying like that's
flexible, morally flexible. Um, you
know, I think that big surprise. Yeah.
No, no, let's make a deal. I I would say
that that right now that's kind of like
the most obvious um you know one out
there that you know there's still some
element of of hard ball. My view is that
that's somewhat overstated that that is
somewhat overstated because he needs to
get one big beautiful bill passed first
before that and then potentially you can
play the game. But the fact that this
899 was removed tells me that they know
that getting a deal with Europe is
probably, you know, a larger, you know,
u impediment to what they're trying to
do. And that there still is now this new
conditioning in the market where instead
of like increasing the rhetoric at the
highs, you know, Trump has capitulated
back into Trump 1.0, which is like, you
know, run hot, right? He's now and they
are best in himself with the headlines
out at the end of the day. They're
they're trying to squeeze this thing
higher and financial conditions are
easing. The dollar is moving lower. Long
and yield has started rallying
ironically because the market is
sniffing, you know, a dovish turn within
the Fed, you know, in including recent
comments from people that I don't think
would have anticipated um necessarily
outside of Waller um who's auditioning
for the Fed job. Um and you know, why
are they beginning to turn like that?
Yes, there's a normalization dynamic
with regards to where inflation is now.
We think Jerome Pal is already at two
dots are right, you know, for the end of
the year. And there's just this modest
turn, but they're turning for a reason.
They're turning cuz, you know, quits
rates and claims, you know, are starting
to get a little wonky. And as I said,
the whole American economic miracle goes
wrong when the consumer cracks. And the
consumer cracks is what, you know,
becomes of, you know, the labor market.
and that's starting to look um you know
precarious at best. So I think I don't
think it's going to be a tariff headline
necessarily. I think it's going to be
you know good oldfashioned data a nasty
NFP print you know that type of a thing.
Um is that an acute risk now? Probably
not. Probably you know safe to say you
know within by August um you know we
could be getting spicy and I think
there's real delta not just of like the
first cut in September but you know if
that happens you know it's not just
going to be you know 25 bips right. So
everyone needs to keep shopping, I
guess, to maintain the rally. Do your
duty. So the thing is though, this is
what bothers me is everyone sees some of
these dynamics. We talk about the labor
market weakness all the time. We talk
about the fact that per due to the
tariffs and other factors, the Fed might
be a little bit gunshy or less inclined
to cut like than it otherwise would have
given the set of economic conditions.
And I think like Paul has sort of hinted
at it before that there are conditions
like we all can see this like the and
yet like and yet people keep buying like
it's sort of there's something
intellectually unsatisfying about the
entire environment. Well, cuz like all
this seems very true that all this like
the stagflation risk there is going to
be a cost of tariffs. There is this
cyclical slowdown and yet you know it
goes back to those you know kind of
counterintuitive observations that we
started off with you know where you get
so fixated on like the left side that
you know perversely the corporate
spending uncertainty becomes the biggest
source of demand for stocks. Yeah. you
know, um, and especially to the market
structure stuff, which is just what I
always come back to, like once those
puts start roasting because the worst
case scenario doesn't happen and dealers
got to start buying back that short
delta and then people start squeezing
that short delta as the market starts
rallying back and start buying short
dated calls and dealers get short those
calls and we go short gamma the other
way. you know th those flows and you
know frankly you know a world of um you
know not just this market structure that
feeds momentum right with leveraged ETFs
um you know the prevalence of options
trading the tail wagging the dog yeah
and I don't even know if I can say tail
wagging the dog now I just think it is
the dog um I like that that's good you
know options are the dog yeah um you
know those type of real and synthetic
gamma effects in the market are you know
very high impact and I think at the end
of the day a lot of this is just about
career preservation. Yeah. And when
you've kind of missed badly on a call
people it feels good and you know in the
macro space like I you know I'm super
sensitive to this idea you know you feel
smart to make a bare call because it's
rare stocks go higher. Yeah, that's
right. You know, when you run a back
test, you know, and back testing, I know
is like a four-letter word, but when you
run a back test, you know, this if this
happens and contingent on this, and you
actually get negative forward returns
over a series of average um you know,
over a real number of sample set, um you
know, it's an outlier. The problem is
like sitting in a negative stance when
again goes back to that point, people
are not really incentivized to see the
world burn. You know, it's going to be a
tough thing. So, you got to be dynamic
and pragmatic I think about these
things. All right. Well, uh, Charlie,
let me just say thank you for giving us
a couple swear words to bleep out. It
really helps keep our producers on their
toes.
[Music]
This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway. And I'm
Jill Weisenthal. You can follow me at
the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Armano
Bennett at D-Bot and Kellbrooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we do these live recordings, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. Thanks
for listening.
[Music]